---
path: '/blog/end_of_the_usa'
title: 'The End Of The USA'
date: '2020-03-01'
preview: 'Most people are missing the Tsunami on the horizon because of the waves immediately in front of them. The Tsunami is the end of the USA as we know it due to economic collapse. The waves are the disruptions and tragedies we face as a result of the Corona virus. '
featureImage: 'images/teaching6.jpg'
---

Most people are missing the Tsunami on the horizon because of the waves immediately in front of them. The Tsunami is the end of the USA as we know it due to economic collapse. The waves are the disruptions and tragedies we face as a result of the Corona virus. All of this is happening on what previously appeared to be a totally calm sea. But what most Americans do not realise is that they have been frolicking dangerously close to a fault-line for most of their lives, attending a decadent beach party that despite all appearances, must come to an end.

Since the abandonment of the gold standard in the 1970s, the USA has been heralded as the wealthiest of nations, only because the rest of the world has been willing to value their own currencies against the US Dollar. Such privileging of the US dollar has delayed and obfuscated scrutiny of its sustainability, reliability, and purchasing power across broad time horizons. As the reserve currency of the world, the US dollar is like a wooden ruler against which all other currencies are measured. Despite the porous decaying of its structure across time, the ruler itself is never measured. Unlike everything that is measured against it, there have been no consequences to the accumulated wear-and-tear. When it eventually disintegrates, something else will rush in to replace it, and suddenly it will be beholden to the standard to which it has held all the other currencies. 

The distintegration of the US dollar across time is guaranteed by the way that it is devalued through inflation. The USA flourishes on an ever-expanding money supply that proliferates on demand. This proliferation has been financed by other nations, or by "borrowing" from the Federal Reserve, otherwise known as  money-printing or 'quantitative easing'. As such, the entire US economy is essentially facilitated by the exchanges of "debt money", which is in no way tethered to any finite commodity (such as gold), and thus is only meaningful in as much as the I-Owe-Yous from the US continue to accumulate in the other nation's cookie-jars. And yet, as the credibility of the US dollar has declined, so too has the willingness of other nations to finance US debt. Rather than clamping down on spending in response to this decline in credibility, US administrations have resorted to borrowing from their only remaining benefactor, the Federal Reserve. The result is an ever-expanding supply of a currency with ever-declining credibility. Meanwhile, the US has racked up an astonishing trade deficit with China, thus outsourcing the production of essential goods and services and stunting the ability of the nation to provide for itself in a time of crisis.

This pathogenic cycle is in no small way attributable to the indulgences of an elite ruling class who are happy to put future generations in danger in exchange for the instant gratification of accumulation of wealth and power accumulating to themselves. Politicians who essentially buy votes by promising handouts that the country cannot afford, and those in the banking system who facilitate the untenable longterm practice of money printing, are amongst the worst offenders. And yet, due to the economic illiteracy of most of their constituents, those in power could never be reelected, or reappointed, were they to take the necessary preventative measures. Such measures would demand real sacrifices of the ordinary people who would not tolerate such disruptions and likely interpret them as predatory. It is no accident that the population as a whole feel entitled to the lifestyles that they have always known. It is far easier to inject a nation of junkies with the poison that they demand, than to throw the syringes in the trash and condemn the masses to the misery of their withdrawal symptoms. Only the former scenario accrues power to the syringe-holder, thus insulating them against the existential and material threats that accompany the system as a whole.

Such a system has always been doomed to fail. The unexpected disruption of a global pandemic is merely an accelerating factor. As the US economy grinds to a halt, a population accustomed to a certain level of material wealth and ill-prepared for longterm disruptions to their income, are naturally demanding that the government bail them out of this crisis. During an election year, prospective administrations will get elected insofar as they can reach deeper into their fictional pockets and retrieve larger sums of fictional cash than the other party.  The Federal reserve has cut interest rates to near zero and removed the mandate that banks retain a fractional reserve of 10% of their total assets, thus obliterating any remaining deterrents to excessive borrowing and overspending. All of this is only tenable as long as the rest of the world takes the US dollar seriously and is willing to tolerate the complete reality-denial of the US economy. It is increasingly difficult for that tolerance to continue when such irresponsible and short-sighted fiscal policies are resorted to. The facade is failing, and with the demand for US Treasury bonds going to zero, the rest of the world is turning it's back on the great debtor nation.

In the final hours we will come to realise that seemingly opposed political and economic ideologies share a common enemy. That enemy is the mechanism by which the money supply expanded without without having to contend with the reality of scarcity. Whether you are inclined to blame scarcity-denial on socialism or capitalism, globalism or nationalism, collectivism or individualism, the outcome is the same. Some resources are scarce due to being both finite and in-demand, and it is because these scarce resources need distributing that the very notion of 'an economy' exists. Any economic system that denies scarcity, by playing pretend with fictional money that can be printed on demand, by financing decadent consumerism with debt, by removing deterrents for wasteful and reckless industries and practices, or by condemning future generations to suffer the consequences of the short-sighted indulgence of those who are living now, cannot and will not prevail. The party must come to an end, and the hangover will be brutal.
